Week 10 Script (#14)
Code-4-Community/learning-resources: docs/jumpstart/week-10.md

# Week 10: Deployment

## Agenda
- Deployment
	- What is deploying a program
	- Why do you want to deploy a program
- Heroku
	- What is Heroku
	- Why do we use Heroku
	- Deploy on Heroku
- Deploy our application
	- Deploying Frontend
	- Deploying Backend
	- Deploying Database
	
## Deployment

### What does it mean to deploy our program?

Deploying a program is the act of making a program publicly accessible on the internet through a URL. A program that is deployed is running on either a remote or local server. A server is basically a machine that is running a program waiting for requests. The server that your program is deployed on is running your program and once the URL that maps to your program is requested, the server is in charge of performing the specified actions that you want it to do based on the request URL that you provided.

### Why deploy a program?

> Developers deploy a program in order to publicly showcase their application and allow people to use it. Deploying a program is a great way to showcase what you built or hopefully provide a service to others. Before we deployed our program, everything was running locally on our machine. If you remember, the URL for our program was localhost followed by the port number. However, other people can't access our localhost because, just like the name says, localhost is our local machine server meant just for us. However, once we deploy a program we are given a public URL which others can access and see our application just as we see it in our localhost.

Reviewer: Can you make this present tense? They won't have deployed their program by the time they're reading this.
>Before we deployed our program, everything was running locally on our machine.

You also say 'however' twice in this block, can you clean that up? Maybe say something like this:
>If you remember, the URL for our program has been localhost, followed by the port number. Other people can't access that outside of your local network, though, since, just like the name says, localhost is our local machine. We can fix that by deploying to a remote hosting service, like Heroku, which has a public URL others can access and use for your application (you can also port forward, but that can be impossible to do, especially if you're living on campus).

## Heroku

### What is Heroku?

> Heroku is a cloud platform that allows developers to deploy their applications quick, easy, and free. Heroku is configured to handle a variety of programming languages and frameworks such as Java, Javascript, Python, Ruby, etc. For our case, Heroku is a great choice. Heroku works by having developers upload their project and Heroku runs our application for us and connects it to a URL waiting to respond to requests. In traditional cloud deployment platforms, developers have to create a virtual machine with a certain Operating System and hardware capabilities and then deploy their application within the application on the virtual machine and then connect it to a URL. A virtual machine can be envisioned as a computer that is separate from our physical computer. In this case, the virtual machine sits in some lab that the cloud provider your using owns, filled with hundreds of other VM's and you basically "rent" these machines. This is a complicated and long process. Thankfully, Heroku simplifies the process. All developers have to do is connect their code with Heroku and Heroku is in charge of doing the rest. 

Reviewer: You have a bit of a run-on sentence here. Can you split up this:
> Heroku works by having developers upload their project and Heroku runs our application for us and connects it to a URL waiting to respond to requests.

Maybe simplify this:
>In traditional cloud deployment platforms, developers have to create a virtual machine with a certain Operating System and hardware capabilities and then deploy their application within the application on the virtual machine and then connect it to a URL. A virtual machine can be envisioned as a computer that is separate from our physical computer. In this case, the virtual machine sits in some lab that the cloud provider your using owns, filled with hundreds of other VM's and you basically "rent" these machines. This is a complicated and long process.

to something like:
>In traditional cloud deployment platforms, developers have to manually configure operating systems, deployment methods and procedures, and URL mappings on a remote server somewhere, which can be a long and complicated process. Thankfully, Heroku simplifies the process. All developers have to do is connect their code with Heroku, and Heroku takes care of the rest!

### Why do we use Heroku

> The main reason we're going to use Heroku is because it is easier to use than traditional cloud deployment platforms, as previously mentioned, and it allows us to deploy our application for free. When you deploy your application you need some computing resources. These computing resources cost money, therefore just to run a very simple server with minimum hardware capabilities can cost around 5-10 dollars a month. Heroku allows us to use these minimum computing resources for free. Of course if you want to upgrade your computing resources to use more RAM or CPU you can pay for that option.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main reason we're going to use Heroku is because it is easier to use than traditional cloud deployment platforms, as previously mentioned, and it allows us to deploy our application for free. When you deploy your application you need some computing resources. These computing resources cost money, therefore, even to run a very simple server with minimum hardware capabilities can cost around 5-10 dollars a month. Heroku allows us to use these minimum computing resources for free, with some restrictions. Of course if you want to upgrade your computing resources to use more RAM or CPU, you can pay for those options.
```

### Install Heroku

> The way our application is structured, our frontend and backend are separated. They are not dependent on one another and are developed in different environments and servers. Therefore, we have to deploy our frontend and backend separately. Thankfully, Heroku provides great documentation as to how to deploy our React frontend application and our Java backend. However, before you deploy any application on Heroku we need to install Heroku on our machine. First, we need to create an account on Heroku. The link to sign up is https://signup.heroku.com/. Once you have signed up for a Heroku account, you have to install it on your machine. Because there are different installation methods depending on the machine that you are using, the download instructions for every operating system can be found here https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/heroku-cli. What you are installing is Heroku's command line application which will allow you to open a terminal and run heroku commands on the terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The way our application is structured, our frontend and backend are separated. They are not dependent on one another and are developed in different environments and tech stacks. Therefore, we have to deploy our frontend and backend separately. Thankfully, Heroku provides great documentation as to how to deploy our React frontend application and our Java backend. However, before you deploy any application on Heroku, we'll need to install Heroku on our machine. First, we need to create an account on Heroku. The link to sign up is [signup.heroku.com](https://signup.heroku.com/). Once you have signed up for a Heroku account, you have to install some of its software on your machine. Because there are different installation methods depending on the machine that you are using, the download instructions for every operating system can be found [here](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/heroku-cli). You are installing Heroku's command line application, which will allow you to open a terminal and run Heroku commands on the terminal.
```

### Deploy Frontend

> To deploy our frontend application, we need to navigate to the directory that contains our Frontend application. Once we have navigated to our directory we have to initialize a git repository if a git repository has not been initialized yet. To initialize a git repository we run the command:

Reviewer: Can you fix this line to either have frontend as capitalized or not (it looks like you keep it lowercase everywhere else, so maybe just do that)

 ```shell
 git init
 ```
 After running our git init command, we have to add our project's files to the git repository. To add the files we type the command:
  ```shell
  git add .
  ```
Once all the files are added we can call
```shell
git commit -m 'commit message'

> ```

Reviewer: This only needs to be done if they've just initialized the git repo or haven't committed their most recent changes, maybe say that somewhere in these lines too. Also, most of them are probably still working off of the starter code branch, so maybe have them merge whatever they have into master

Reviewer: I think it would be best if you add in a line here telling them how to merge their changes into master after committing, since they're all probably working off of the `starter-code` branch still.

Once we have committed our code, we now have to connect our downloaded Heroku application with our Heroku account. We run the command:
```shell 
heroku login
```
follow the instructions to enter our Heroku credentials. Once we have logged in, we now have to create a new Heroku project. 

To create a project we type the command:
```shell 
heroku create (PROJECT_NAME) --buildpack mars/create-react-app
```
By doing this, Heroku is creating a new deployment server for us and giving us a custom URL for us to use. The buidlpack part is our way of asserting

> that our project is a React project. Usually, Heroku automatically detects that it is a React application but sometimes it does not. We add the buildpack just to avoid any errors
> in case. Now comes the part where we connect our application with our new Heroku created project. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that our project is a React project. Usually, Heroku automatically detects that it is a React application but sometimes it does not. We add the buildpack to make sure we avoid those errors. Now comes the part where we connect our application with our new Heroku created project. 
```

```shell

> git remote add heroku

Reviewer: Heroku should add the remote automatically, but you can manually do it with `heroku git:remote -a <project_name>`

```
This will add Heroku to our git repository which is how we will push our code to Heroku. Finally, to push our code we run the command: 
```shell
git push heroku master
```
This will push our current committed code that is in our <strong> master </strong> branch on git. If we want to deploy a branch that is not 
the master's branch we can run the command:
```shell

> git push heroku <branch_name>:master

Reviewer: Maybe add a note in a comment block below this that the command pushes the branch and pretends the branch's name is master

```

> Now that our Frontend code is uploaded to Heroku, we can use the url Heroku gave us to open our application online. Now, anyone with this link will be able to see our application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that our Frontend code is uploaded to Heroku, we can use the url Heroku gave us to open our application online. Now anyone with this link will be able to see our application.
```

To open our application we can run:
```shell 
heroku open
```
This should open a browser tab with our project's home page. 
However, this is only the user interface portion of our application. Now we have to deploy our backend code.

> ### Deploy backend

Reviewer: Can you also go over the changes made to the `PropertiesLoader`

Reviewer: ^

> To deploy our backend application, first we have to configure our application. First, we have to navigate to our pom.xml 

Reviewer: You use the word 'first' twice here

> file which gets created after every maven project. We have to configure all our app's dependencies through maven so that when we export our Java project our dependencies also get exported.

Reviewer: The pom.xml isn't really created after every maven project, it's created to configure the current project. The dependencies are configured through that pom.xml

> An app's dependencies is external code that other people wrote that we use in our application. Usually, if we did not have problems during local development, then our pom.xml file should be fine and ready to be exported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A dependency is external code from other people or organizations we want to use in our application. Usually, if we did not have problems during local development, then our pom.xml file should be fine and ready to be exported.
```

> If not, then now is the time to fix it. Potential fixes include using different versions of a dependency or getting rid of dependencies that we did not end up using.

Reviewer: There is one dependency we had to add to this. Can you mention it here and tell people what to add and where to put it?

> Next, we have to create a Procfile. This is a text-like file that that acts almost like a configuration file that Heroku uses to set up your java application. Our procfile must look like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we have to create a Procfile. This is a text file that that configures Heroku to set up your Java application. Our Procfile must look like:
```

> ```ignorelang

Reviewer: Don't forget to specify where the Procfile should go, just like you did for the system.properties file

web: java $JAVA_OPTS -cp target/classes:target/dependency/* <project main package>
```

> In our case, if you download our catch-up code, our procfile looks like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our case, if you download our catch-up code, our Procfile looks like:
```

Procfile needs to be named "Procfile" exactly

```ignorelang
web: java $JAVA_OPTS -jar service/target/service-1.0-SNAPSHOT-jar-with-dependencies.jar
```

> What this procfile is doing is specifying that our application will use the HTTP protocol, indicated by the "web" portion and our "java" section specifies it is a Java application. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This Procfile specifies that our application will use the web, indicated by the "web" portion, and our "java" section specifies how to start it up. 
```

The "web" part lets it know it's not just a background process, and that it should be allowed to receive/make requests

> The last portion of the Procfile creates our jar file. A jar file is a file used to run a java application. You can use a jar file to run your java code anywhere. It's easily exported and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The last portion of the Procfile creates our jar file. A jar file is a file used to run a Java application. You can use a jar file to run your Java code anywhere. It's easily exported and
```

is how Heroku runs our application. 

> The next configuration we need a <strong> system.properties </strong> file. This is a file that Heroku uses to define our application's properties such as our Java and Maven version. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next configuration we need is a <strong> system.properties </strong> file. This is a file that Heroku uses to define our application's properties, such as the Java and Maven versions. 
```

> The next configuration we need a <strong> system.properties </strong> file. This is a file that Heroku uses to define our application's properties such as our Java and Maven version. 

Reviewer: Maybe also mention that this properties file is different from the one we keep in our service/.../resources/properties directory, since this is purely for Heroku configuration

Our system.properties looks like
```ignorelang
java.runtime.version=11
maven.version=3.6.2
```
Make sure this file is in our root directory so that Heroku can easily identify this file.

Once we have all of our configurations set up, we can begin deploying our backend. Navigate to our backend directory and run the command:

```shell
mvn clean install
```

This will clean our application and build it again.
Once we verified that our application successfully built, we follow the same steps as deploying our frontend code.

We run the commands:

```shell
git add .
```
which adds all our files to our project's git repository

```shell
git commit -m
```

> which commits our added files

Reviewer: Don't forget to mention here that this should only be done if you just initialized a git repo or if they haven't committed these changes. Also, make them merge their changes to master

We should already be logged into Heroku because we deployed our frontend code but if we're not, then we have to login again using:
```shell
heroku login
```

After logging in we run:

```shell
heroku create
```
which creates a new project on Heroku that represents our backend

```shell
git push heroku master
```
This will push our code to the Heroku server. Again, if we want to deploy a version that is not in our master branch we run the command:
```shell
git push heroku <branch_name>:master
```

After pushing our code to the Heroku server we should be given a URL. This URL is now the URL that our frontend needs to make request to.
To verify that our backend deployed successfully, we again run the command:
```shell
heroku open
```
which should open a new browser window with a message at the top saying <strong> Hello Jumpstarters! </strong>

Now that our backend and frontend are deployed, we have to configure our requests URL. We have to navigate back to our frontend project and modify our 
<strong> .env.production </strong> file and change it from:

~~REACT_APP_API_DOMAIN = "http://localhost:8081"~~

> REACT_APP_API_DOMAIN = "<heroku_backend_url>"

Reviewer: Good job figuring this out! One minor issue is that this file should not be included in git with the .gitignore. Instead, it should be set in the Heroku secrets

Now that we changed our API request URL we have to re-deploy our frontend with this modified changes. To do this,
we simply navigate back to our frontend project directory and type in:
```shell
git add .
```
Which adds all our modified files.

```shell

> git commit -m "<message" .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
git commit -m "<message>" .
```

```

Which commits our newly updated code.

```shell
git push heroku master
```

Will push the new changes to Heroku and update our current project.

Now, our frontend application will make requests to our new request URL. 

### Deploy PostgreSQL
Okay so now we have deployed our frontend and our backend and now we have to deploy our database. Similar to our frontend and backend, our database has been running locally on our machine. Therefore, no one else has access to this data.
We have to deploy our database to the cloud so that everyone that accesses our application shares the same database. 

Heroku provides us many ways to configure a Postgres database for our application. in fact, Heroku can offer us a Postgres database that we can connect our application to. 

First, we have to run our migration script. This is a command that will migrate our local database schema to our 

> Heroku postgresql database. To do this, we navigate to <strong> src/persist/resources/migrations </strong> directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Heroku PostgreSQL database. To do this, we navigate to <strong> src/persist/resources/migrations </strong> directory.
```

> Once we are there, there should be a couple of SQL files. These SQL files are what will migrate our local database to our heroku

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once we are there, there should be a couple of SQL files. These SQL files are what will migrate our local database to our Heroku
```

> postgresql database. To do this we run the command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PostgreSQL database. To do this we run the command:
```

```shell
heroku pg:psql
```

> This will start Heroku's postgres database that is provisioned to us. You should now see that our terminal says that we have connected to our postgresql database server. Now

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will start a terminal connected to Heroku's Postgres database that is provisioned to us. You should now see that our terminal says that we have connected to our PostgreSQL database server. Now
```

> we are no longer in our current project directory but rather in our database's server. To leave our database server we run the command:

Reviewer: We sort of are still in the current project directory, since that's how we're able to run the scripts without prefixing a path. Maybe say
>Now we are running PostgreSQL commands directly on the database server.

```shell
\q
``` 
This will return us back to our backend project directory.

To run the migrations scripts we run the command:
```shell 
\i <file_name>.sql
```
We have to run this command in order and one at a time for each file. Once we ran the migration scripts, we have now successfully deployed and migrated

> our database to Heroku. We now have a fully functional and complete web application that is accessible by anyone.

Reviewer: Also mention that they can run the seeder script by navigating to the seeder directory and doing the same

# Week 10: Deployment

## Agenda
- Deployment
	- What is deploying a program
	- Why do you want to deploy a program
- Heroku
	- What is Heroku
	- Why do we use Heroku
	- Deploy on Heroku
- Deploy our application
	- Deploying Frontend
	- Deploying Backend
	- Deploying Database
	
## Deployment

### What does it mean to deploy our program?

> Deploying a program is the act of making a program publicly accessible on the internet through a URL. A program that is deployed is running on either a remote or local server. A server is basically a machine that is running a program waiting for requests. The server that your program is deployed on is running your program and once the URL that maps to your program is requested, the server is in charge of performing the specified actions that you want it to do based on the request URL that you provided.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Deploying a program is the act of making a program publicly accessible on the internet through a URL. A program that is deployed is running on either a remote or local server. A server is basically a machine that is running a program waiting for requests. The server that your program is deployed on is running your program, and once the URL that maps to your program is requested, the server is in charge of performing whatever operations you programmed it to do!
```

### Why deploy a program?

Developers deploy a program in order to publicly showcase their application and allow people to use it. Deploying a program is a great way to showcase what you built or hopefully provide a service to others. Currently, our application is running locally on our machine. If you remember, the URL for our program was localhost followed by the port number. Other people can't access our localhost because, just like the name says, localhost is our local machine server meant just for us. We can fix that by deploying to a remote hosting service, like Heroku, which has a public URL others can access and use for your application.

## Heroku

### What is Heroku?

> Heroku is a cloud platform that allows developers to deploy their applications quick, easy, and free. Heroku is configured to handle a variety of programming languages and frameworks such as Java, Javascript, Python, Ruby, etc. For our case, Heroku is a great choice. Developers upload their project to Heroku's deployment platform and our application gets assigned to a URL. This URL is then waiting to respond to incoming requests. In traditional cloud deployment platforms, developers have to manually configure operating systems, deployment methods and procedures, and URL mappings on a remote server somewhere, which can be a long and complicated process. Thankfully, Heroku simplifies the process. All developers have to do is connect their code with Heroku, and Heroku takes care of the rest!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Heroku is a cloud platform that allows developers to quickly and easily deploy their applications for free. It's configured to handle a variety of programming languages and frameworks such as Java, Javascript, Python, Ruby, etc. For our case, Heroku is a great choice. Developers upload their project to Heroku's deployment platform and our application gets assigned to a URL. This URL is then waiting to respond to incoming requests. In traditional cloud deployment platforms, developers have to manually configure operating systems, deployment methods and procedures, and URL mappings on a remote server somewhere, which can be a long and complicated process. Thankfully, Heroku simplifies the process. All developers have to do is connect their code with Heroku, and Heroku takes care of the rest!
```

>   All developers have to do is connect their code with Heroku and Heroku is in charge of doing the rest. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Duplicate Line

### Why do we use Heroku
The main reason we're going to use Heroku is because it is easier to use than traditional cloud deployment platforms, as previously mentioned, and it allows us to deploy our application for free. When you deploy your application you need some computing resources. These computing resources cost money, therefore, even to run a very simple server with minimum hardware capabilities can cost around 5-10 dollars a month. Heroku allows us to use these minimum computing resources for free, with some restrictions. Of course if you want to upgrade your computing resources to use more RAM or CPU, you can pay for those options.

### Install Heroku

> The way our application is structured, our frontend and backend are separated. They are not dependent on one another and are developed in different environments and tech stacks. Therefore, we have to deploy our frontend and backend separately. Thankfully, Heroku provides great documentation as to how to deploy our React frontend application and our Java backend. However, before you deploy any application on Heroku, we'll need to install Heroku on our machine. First, we need to create an account on Heroku. The link to sign up is [signup.heroku.com](https://signup.heroku.com/). Once you have signed up for a Heroku account, you have to install some of its software on your machine. Because there are different installation methods depending on the machine that you are using, the download instructions for every operating system can be found [here](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/heroku-cli). You are installing Heroku's command line application, which will allow you to open a terminal and run Heroku commands on the terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The way our application is structured, our frontend and backend are separated. They are not dependent on one another and are developed in different environments and tech stacks. Therefore, we have to deploy our frontend and backend separately. Thankfully, Heroku provides great documentation as to how to deploy our React frontend and Java backend. However, before you deploy any application on Heroku, we'll need to install Heroku on our machine. First, we need to create an account on Heroku. The link to sign up is [signup.heroku.com](https://signup.heroku.com/). Once you have signed up for a Heroku account, you have to install some of its software on your machine. Because there are different installation methods depending on the machine that you are using, the download instructions for every operating system can be found [here](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/heroku-cli). You are installing Heroku's command line application, which will allow you to open a terminal and run Heroku commands on the terminal.
```

### Deploy Frontend

> To deploy our frontend application, we need to navigate to the directory that contains our frontend application. Once we have navigated to our directory we have to initialize a git repository if a git repository has not been initialized yet. To initialize a git repository we run the command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To deploy our frontend application, we need to navigate to its directory. Once we have navigated to the directory we have to initialize a git repository if a git repository has not been initialized yet. To initialize a git repository we run the command:
```

 ```shell
 git init
 ```
 After running our git init command, we have to add our project's files to the git repository. To add the files we type the command:
  ```shell
  git add .
  ```
Once all the files are added we can call
```shell
git commit -m 'commit message'
```

Once we have committed our code, we now have to connect our downloaded Heroku application with our Heroku account. We run the command:
```shell 
heroku login
```

> follow the instructions to enter our Heroku credentials. Once we have logged in, we now have to create a new Heroku project. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then follow the instructions to enter our Heroku credentials. Once we have logged in, we now have to create a new Heroku project. 
```

```
Now that our frontend code is uploaded to Heroku, we can use the url Heroku gave us to open our application online. Now anyone with this link will be able to see our application.
To open our application we can run:
```shell 
heroku open
```
This should open a browser tab with our project's home page. 
However, this is only the user interface portion of our application. Now we have to deploy our backend code.

### Deploy backend

To deploy our backend application, first we have to configure our application. Next, we have to navigate to our pom.xml 
file. We have to configure all our app's dependencies through maven so that when we export our Java project our dependencies also get exported.
A dependency is external code from other people or organizations we want to use in our application. Usually, if we did not have problems during local development, then our pom.xml file should be fine and ready to be exported.
If not, then now is the time to fix it. Potential fixes include using different versions of a dependency or getting rid of dependencies that we did not end up using.

We actually need to add a dependency ourselves to deploy our backend.

``` xml

> <plugin>

Reviewer: Make sure you mention which parent this should be under (I can't remember if it needs to be `pluginManagement` or somewhere else)

>         <!-- Maven's plugin for copying our dependencies below into our executable Jar file. -->
>         <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
>         <artifactId>maven-dependency-plugin</artifactId>
>         <version>3.0.1</version>
>         <executions>
>           <execution>
>             <id>copy-dependencies</id>
>             <phase>package</phase>
>             <goals><goal>copy-dependencies</goal></goals>
>           </execution>
>         </executions>
>       </plugin>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <!-- Maven's plugin for copying our dependencies below into our executable Jar file. -->
    <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
    <artifactId>maven-dependency-plugin</artifactId>
    <version>3.0.1</version>
    <executions>
      <execution>
        <id>copy-dependencies</id>
        <phase>package</phase>
        <goals><goal>copy-dependencies</goal></goals>
      </execution>
    </executions>
  </plugin>
```

Reviewer: Looks good though!

Now that we changed our API request URL we have to re-deploy our frontend with this modified changes. To do this,
we simply navigate back to our frontend project directory and type in:
```shell
git add .
```
Which adds all our modified files.

```shell
git commit -m "<message>" .
```

Which commits our newly updated code.

```shell
git push heroku master
```

Will push the new changes to Heroku and update our current project.

Now, our frontend application will make requests to our new request URL. 

### Deploy PostgreSQL
Before we proceed in deploying our database we have to note one file. Under our <strong> service/src/main/java/com/codeforcommunity/util</strong> file you will see a class called PropertiesLoader.
This class will examine our resources file under <strong> persist/src/main/resources </strong> and get our database properties. This is useful because this is how our backend service knows where 
to find our PostgreSQL database. 

Okay so now we have deployed our frontend and our backend and now we have to deploy our database. Similar to our frontend and backend, our database has been running locally on our machine. Therefore, no one else has access to this data.

> We have to deploy our database to the cloud so that everyone that accesses our application shares the same database. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have to deploy our database to the cloud so that everyone that accesses our application shares the same database schema. 
```

Once we are there, there should be a couple of SQL files. These SQL files are what will migrate our local database to our Heroku
PostgreSQL database. To do this we run the command:
```shell
heroku pg:psql
```
This will start a terminal connected to Heroku's Postgres database that is provisioned to us. You should now see that our terminal says that we have connected to our PostgreSQL database server. 
Now we are running PostgreSQL commands directly on the database server. To leave our database server we run the command:
```shell
\q
``` 
This will return us back to our backend project directory.

To run the migrations scripts we run the command:
```shell 
\i <file_name>.sql
```
We have to run this command in order and one at a time for each file. 

Additionally, another script we can run is our seeder script. This script will give our database same base data to use so it is not 
an empty database. To run our seeder script we navigate to our seeder folder which is under <strong> src/persist/resources/seeder</strong>. Once we are in this directory we run the same commands as our migration script:
 
```shell 
\i <file_name>.sql

> ```

Reviewer: Maybe move this between opening the psql console and exiting out of it.

### Deploy Frontend

To deploy our frontend application, we need to navigate to its directory. Once we have navigated to the directory we have to initialize a git repository if a git repository has not been initialized yet. To initialize a git repository we run the command:
```shell
git init
```
After running our git init command, we have to add our project's files to the git repository. To add the files we type the command:
```shell
git add .
```
Once all the files are added, we can call
```shell
git commit -m 'commit message'
```

> Once we have committed our code, we now have to push it into our master branch on git. To do this we run the command:
> 
> ```shell
> git push <branch_name>:master
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Whoops, missed this one.

> If you have been working from the starter code from the first week, then our branch name is called starter-code. If you have created your own
> git repository, make sure to replace <branch_name> with the name of your branch if you are <strong> not </strong> in the master branch already.
> 

Reviewer: Maybe add this in

```suggestion
If you have been working from the starter code from the first week, then our branch name is called starter-code. To merge that into master, you can run the following commands: `git merge master` to add your changes to master, and `git checkout master` to switch to the master branch.
If you have created your own
git repository (if your `git init` command succeeded a minute ago), and you haven't created any branches, then you'll already be on master.
```

> Once we have pushed our code, we now have to connect our downloaded Heroku application with our Heroku account. We run the command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We now have to connect our downloaded Heroku application with our Heroku account. We run the command:
```

A dependency is external code from other people or organizations we want to use in our application. Usually, if we did not have problems during local development, then our pom.xml file should be fine and ready to be exported.
If not, then now is the time to fix it. Potential fixes include using different versions of a dependency or getting rid of dependencies that we did not end up using.

We actually need to add a dependency ourselves to deploy our backend.

``` xml
<plugin>
    <!-- Maven's plugin for copying our dependencies below into our executable Jar file. -->
    <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
    <artifactId>maven-dependency-plugin</artifactId>
    <version>3.0.1</version>
    <executions>
      <execution>
        <id>copy-dependencies</id>
        <phase>package</phase>
        <goals><goal>copy-dependencies</goal></goals>
      </execution>
    </executions>
  </plugin>
```

 
This dependency is a maven dependency that copies our dependencies and puts them into a jar file. A jar file is a file that runs our Java application. We'll explain

> more about jar files in a little bit. Make sure this dependency is added under the `<plugins>` tag (make sure you <strong> don't </strong> put it under `<pluginManagement>`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
more about jar files in a little bit. Make sure this dependency is added under the `<plugins>` tag (make sure you <strong> don't </strong> put it under `<pluginManagement>`):
```

Whoops

The next configuration we need is a <strong> system.properties </strong> file. This is a file that Heroku uses to define our application's properties, such as the Java and Maven versions. This properties
file is different from our <strong> service/.../resources/properties </strong> directory as this property file is only for Heroku.

Our system.properties looks like
```ignorelang
java.runtime.version=11
maven.version=3.6.2
```
<strong> Make sure this file is in our root directory with your Procfile so that Heroku can easily identify this file. </strong>

Once we have all of our configurations set up, we can begin deploying our backend. Navigate to our backend directory and run the command:

```shell
mvn clean install
```

This will clean our application and build it again.
Once we verified that our application successfully built, we follow the same steps as deploying our frontend code.

If we have not committed our changes to the master branch make so to do so with:

```shell
git add .
```
which adds all our files to our project's git repository

```shell
git commit -m
```
which commits our added files

> 
> Once we have committed our code, we now have to push it into our master branch on git. To do this we run the command:
> 
> ```shell
> git push <branch_name>:master
> ```
> 
> If you have been working from the starter code from the first week, then our branch name is called starter-code. If you have created your own
> git repository, make sure to replace <branch_name> with the name of your branch if you are <strong> not </strong> in the master branch already.
> 
> 
> We should already be logged into Heroku because we deployed our frontend code but if we're not, then we have to login again using:
> ```shell
> heroku login
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

After logging in we run:

```shell
heroku create
```
which creates a new project on Heroku that represents our backend

```shell
git push heroku master
```

> This will push our code to the Heroku server. Again, if we want to deploy a version that is not in our master branch we run the command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will push our code to the Heroku server. Again, if we want to deploy, we run the command:
```

```shell

> git push heroku <branch_name>:master

Reviewer: ```suggestion
git push heroku <branch_name>
```

```

> This will push our designated git branch but Heroku pretends that this branch is the master branch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will push our designated git branch. Again, you should merge your branch into master using the steps above if you're not on master already.
```

### Deploy Frontend

To deploy our frontend application, we need to navigate to its directory. Once we have navigated to the directory we have to initialize a git repository if a git repository has not been initialized yet. To initialize a git repository we run the command:
 ```shell
 git init
 ```
 After running our git init command, we have to add our project's files to the git repository. To add the files we type the command:
  ```shell
  git add .

>   ```

Reviewer: There are spaces in front of the backticks here that breaks the formatting (I can't make the auto-suggestions when there are backticks involved, so you'll have to fix this yourself)

Once all the files are added we can call
```shell
git commit -m 'commit message'
```

If we already had a git repository then first let's push our code to the master branch before deploying our frontend.
In case you forgot the steps to push our code is:

```shell 
git add .
```

```shell 
git commit -m "<message>"
```

```shell 
git push

> ``` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

We haven't been having them push to GitHub at all, so let's just skip this part

Once we have committed our code, we now have to connect our downloaded Heroku application with our Heroku account. We run the command:
```shell 
heroku login
```
Then follow the instructions to enter our Heroku credentials. Once we have logged in, we now have to create a new Heroku project. 

To create a project we type the command:
```shell 
heroku create (PROJECT_NAME) --buildpack mars/create-react-app
```
By doing this, Heroku is creating a new deployment server for us and giving us a custom URL for us to use. The buildpack part is our way of asserting
that our project is a React project. Usually, Heroku automatically detects that it is a React application but sometimes it does not. We add the buildpack to make sure we avoid those errors.
Heroku should automatically connect our git repository to the newly created Heroku project but in case it did not we run the command:
```shell
git remote add heroku

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

It should be okay to take this out, since Heroku will set up the git remote for them, and this might just have them overwrite it

This will add Heroku to our git repository which is how we will push our code to Heroku. Finally, to push our code we run the command: 
```shell
git push heroku master
```
This will push our current committed code that is in our <strong> master </strong> branch on git. If we want to deploy a branch that is not 
the master's branch we can run the command:
```shell
git push heroku <branch_name>:master
```

> This will push our designated git branch but Heroku pretends that this branch is the master branch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will push our designated git branch, but git pretends that this branch is master.
```

A dependency is external code from other people or organizations we want to use in our application. Usually, if we did not have problems during local development, then our pom.xml file should be fine and ready to be exported.
If not, then now is the time to fix it. Potential fixes include using different versions of a dependency or getting rid of dependencies that we did not end up using.

We actually need to add a dependency ourselves to deploy our backend.

``` xml
<plugin>
    <!-- Maven's plugin for copying our dependencies below into our executable Jar file. -->
    <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
    <artifactId>maven-dependency-plugin</artifactId>
    <version>3.0.1</version>
    <executions>
      <execution>
        <id>copy-dependencies</id>
        <phase>package</phase>
        <goals><goal>copy-dependencies</goal></goals>
      </execution>
    </executions>
  </plugin>
```

 
This dependency is a maven dependency that copies our dependencies and puts them into a jar file. A jar file is a file that runs our Java application. We'll explain

> more about jar files in a little bit. Make sure this dependency is added under:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
more about jar files in a little bit. Make sure this dependency is added under the `<plugins>` tag (make sure you <strong> don't </strong> put it under `<pluginManagement>`:

```

>  ``` xml

Reviewer: There's a space in front of the backticks here that breaks the formatting

 <pluginManagement>
<!-- Insert Dependency here -->

> </pluginManagement

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 <plugins>
<!-- Insert Dependency here -->
</plugins>
```

Whoops, it ended up being `plugins` and not `pluginManagement`

```

Next, we have to create a Procfile. This is a text file that that configures Heroku to set up your Java application. Our Procfile must look like:

```ignorelang
web: java $JAVA_OPTS -cp target/classes:target/dependency/* <project main package>
```

In our case, if you download our catch-up code, our Procfile looks like:
```ignorelang
web: java $JAVA_OPTS -jar service/target/service-1.0-SNAPSHOT-jar-with-dependencies.jar
```

This Procfile specifies that our application will use the web, indicated by the "web" portion, and our "java" section specifies how to start it up. 

> The last portion of the Procfile creates our jar file. A jar file is a file used to run a Java application. You can use a jar file to run your Java code anywhere. It's easily exported and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The last portion of the Procfile specifies how to run our jar file. A jar file is a file used to run a Java application. You can use a jar file to run your Java code anywhere. It's easily exported and
```

> is how Heroku runs our application. Our Procfile is located in our project's root directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is how Heroku runs our application. <strong> Our Procfile is located in our project's root directory. </strong>
```

The next configuration we need is a <strong> system.properties </strong> file. This is a file that Heroku uses to define our application's properties, such as the Java and Maven versions. This properties
file is different from our <strong> service/.../resources/properties </strong> directory as this property file is only for Heroku.

Our system.properties looks like
```ignorelang
java.runtime.version=11
maven.version=3.6.2
```

> Make sure this file is in our root directory so that Heroku can easily identify this file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<strong> Make sure this file is in our root directory with your Procfile so that Heroku can easily identify this file. </strong>
```

Once we have all of our configurations set up, we can begin deploying our backend. Navigate to our backend directory and run the command:

```shell
mvn clean install
```

This will clean our application and build it again.
Once we verified that our application successfully built, we follow the same steps as deploying our frontend code.

> If we have not committed our changes to the master branch make so to do so with:

Reviewer: Maybe add another comment down here on how to merge changes on their current branch to master

```shell
git add .
```
which adds all our files to our project's git repository

```shell
git commit -m
```
which commits our added files

> ```shell script
> git push
> ```
> which pushes our code to the master branch.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

See the other `git push` comment above

To verify that our backend deployed successfully, we again run the command:
```shell
heroku open
```
which should open a new browser window with a message at the top saying <strong> Hello Jumpstarters! </strong>

Now that our backend and frontend are deployed, we have to configure our requests URL. 
To do this, we have to use a feature in Heroku called Heroku configuration files or Heroku secrets. Basically, this is a way for us
to write down important information such as our backend request route in a secure and inaccessible way. To do this we 
have to navigate back to our frontend project. Now we run the command:
```shell
heroku config:set REQUEST_URL=<backend_url>
```

This creates a configuration variable called REQUEST_URL which maps to the value of our backend url. Now we have to go to our React application and 
replace where we write <strong> REACT_APP_API_DOMAIN </strong> with <strong> process.env.REQUEST_URL </strong>

Therefore, everytime we make a request, our React application will look for our current processes configuration variable called REQUEST_URL, which Heroku 

> stored, and make requests using that URL.

Reviewer: Looks good. Have you tested this out to double check though? (it might be working right now because of the .env.production file, so maybe try removing that and see if it works

Reviewer: I just got it working locally, can you put something in here to tell people to remove the .env.production file if it exists for them?

Now that we changed our API request URL we have to re-deploy our frontend with this modified changes. To do this,
we simply navigate back to our frontend project directory and type in:
```shell
git add .
```
Which adds all our modified files.

```shell
git commit -m "<message>" .
```

Which commits our newly updated code.

```shell
git push heroku master
```

Will push the new changes to Heroku and update our current project.

Now, our frontend application will make requests to our new request URL. 

### Deploy PostgreSQL
Before we proceed in deploying our database we have to note one file. Under our <strong> service/src/main/java/com/codeforcommunity/util</strong> file you will see a class called PropertiesLoader.
This class will examine our resources file under <strong> persist/src/main/resources </strong> and get our database properties. This is useful because this is how our backend service knows where 

> to find our PostgreSQL database. 

Reviewer: Maybe put this with the comment above where I originally wanted you to work on this since it also provides the port to start up on
